# Nurturing reliable and robust open-source scientific software

[Leonardo Uieda](http://leouieda.com/)
and
[Paul Wessel](http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/wessel/)

Invited to the "Open-Source Software in the Geosciences" session of the AGU
Fall Meeting, 2017.


## Abstract

Scientific results are increasingly the product of software. The
reproducibility and validity of published results cannot be ensured without
access to the source code of the software used to produce them. Therefore, the
code itself is a fundamental part of the methodology and must be published
along with the results. With such a reliance on software, it is troubling that
most scientists do not receive formal training in software development. Tools
such as version control, continuous integration, and automated testing are
routinely used in industry to ensure the correctness and robustness of
software. However, many scientist do not even know of their existence (although
efforts like [Software Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org/) are having
an impact on this issue). Publishing the source code is only the first step in
creating an open-source project. For a project to grow it must provide
documentation, participation guidelines, and a welcoming environment for new
contributors. Expanding the project community is often more challenging than
the technical aspects of software development. Maintainers must invest time to
enforce the rules of the project and to onboard new members, which can be
difficult to justify in the context of the “publish or perish” mentality. This
problem will continue as long as software contributions are not recognized as
valid scholarship by hiring and tenure committees. Furthermore, there are still
unsolved problems in providing attribution for software contributions. Many
journals and metrics of academic productivity do not recognize citations to
sources other than traditional publications. Thus, some authors choose to
publish an article about the software and use it as a citation marker. One
issue with this approach is that updating the reference to include new
contributors involves writing and publishing a new article. A better approach
would be to cite a permanent archive of individual versions of the source code
in services such as [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/). However, citations to these
sources are not always recognized when computing citation metrics. In summary,
the widespread development of reliable and robust open-source software relies
on the creation of formal training programs in software development best
practices and the recognition of software as a valid form of scholarship.

## License

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"><img
alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0"
src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br>
This content is licensed under a <a rel="license"
href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License</a>.
